---
layout: post
title: "32c3 talk highlights"
date: '2016-01-03'
category:
- technology
- data
---

Here are a few of the best talks I had the chance to see, and those that were recommended to me - mostly along the lines of technology and its use among under-represented communities.

<!--more-->

### The architecture of a street level panopticon, by Dia Kayyali

<iframe width="853" height="480" src="https://media.ccc.de/v/32c3-7374-the_architecture_of_a_street_level_panopticon/oembed" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Continuing the theme of, well, reality: I enjoyed this talk a lot for its focus on under-represented groups, and the more nuanced perspective towards privacy that Dia provided. Issues covered here are important, and scary, and - hopefully- going to be talked about more in the future

### Intelexit, by Gloria Spindle / Peng Collective

<iframe width="853" height="480" src="https://media.ccc.de/v/32c3-7426-intelexit/oembed" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Gloria is a fantastic presenter, and I'm a big fan of Peng's work - great for inspiration around creative activism, and new ways of thinking about topics that we hear a lot about at Congress.

### Mobile Censorship in Iran, by Mahsa

<iframe width="853" height="480" src="https://media.ccc.de/v/32c3-7529-mobile_censorship_in_iran/oembed" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

I feel like the title of this is a little limiting: in this talk, Mahsa talks about internet censorship on a broad scale in Iran, not just mobile. She's super knowledgeable about the topic, explains things in an engaging way, and gives a great overview to a fascinating and changing landscape in Iran. Recommended.

### The Price Of Dissent, by UK CAGE and Cerie Bullivent

<iframe width="853" height="480" src="https://media.ccc.de/v/32c3-7443-the_price_of_dissent/oembed" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Particularly chilling - this is on surveillance of Muslim communities in the UK, and mostly I heard about this during congress by people who told me they cried during it.

### Internet Landscapes, by Evan Roth 

<iframe width="853" height="480" src="https://media.ccc.de/v/32c3-7538-internet_landscapes/oembed" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Haven't watched this yet, but it got rave reviews from lots of friends there.

### Profiling (in)justice, by Jeff Deutch

<iframe width="853" height="480" src="https://media.ccc.de/v/32c3-7264-profiling_in_justice/oembed" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

I really enjoyed Jeff's talk. It was very specific both in scope of the problem, and in potential solutions suggested, and had some great research backing up his points.

### Keynote, by Fatuma Musa Afrah 

<iframe width="853" height="480" src="https://media.ccc.de/v/32c3-7565-keynote/oembed" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Back in May, I had the pleasure of sitting on [a panel with Fatuma](https://re-publica.de/en/session/closed-migration-open-export), and speaking immediately after Fatuma was quite intimidating! Now, I'd guess more people understand why: she speaks from the heart, is incredibly honest, and brings a big dose of reality to the bubble we're in. Inviting Fatuma to keynote at Congress was a bold and much appreciated move, and seems very appropriate for this year's theme of "Gated Communities."




