---
title: Research themes 
layout: default
---

# Research themes 

Here are some topics that I'd like to spend more time researching and learning about: 

* **The effect that increased use of data by civil society groups is having in society**: through [School of Data](http://schoolofdata.org) (and numerous other initiatives) data skills, and use of open data, are touted as a prerequisite to effective advocacy work. To what degree are people who have attended data skills courses actually using those skills? Does a one week 'data bootcamp' actually have any long term effects, and if so, are people who are learning these skills actually using them to push for transformative change in their societies? 
For example: rather than simply visualising their data better, or producing less text-heavy annual reports, are any new trends being noticed through data analysis, that are then addressed through advocacy? And what effects is this having within society – for example, in countries with a weak social contract between government and citizens, are 'facts' presented by CSOs when backed up with data, more readily accepted? Or are citizens becoming more sceptical, or immune to them, as a result?

* **The ethical issues data and technology bring within the ICT4D movement**. Especially now, with the push for the post-2015 'data revolution', the ethical issues of mass data collection and use are all too often ignored. I co-authored a recent book on responsible development data practises, called [Shooting your harddrive into space, and other ways to practise responsible development data.](http://tiny.cc/rddevbook)

* **The connection between data, global development and accountability**: global development organisations are pushing for better data collection, more timely data, active publishing of open data, through the [International Aid Transparency Initiative](iatistandard.org), as well as their own open data policies. Who is this for? Are they, themselves, actually using the data that they are publishing? Is it structured and presented in such a way that citizens reflected in this data can actually access and use it to demand accountability, or is it designed to answer accountability questions from the side of the rich taxpayer?

* **Hidden gender biases within data** – clearly, no data is neutral. How has structural gender inequality affected data processes and collection that affect our every day lives? Even at the level of 'raw' data, many biases and cultural perceptions have already been applied at the level of planning the data collection process, structuring the data, and the questions asked (or not asked). For example: public health information given to people in the UK states that the symptoms leading up to a heart attack include stabbing pains in your left arm. This is true for men, but much less so for women; the information, however, is given as a standard, without that gender split mentioned. As an initial exercise, a general mapping or collection of case studies to highlight this as a major issue, would be useful. 


## Other things I'm interested in: 

* The role of science fiction in highlighting gender inequality in society. For more information on the topic of feminism and science fiction, see this post, and accompanying podcast. 
* Taking data offline: using more hands on, non-digital ways of displaying information. For example, I ran a workshop in Jakarta on data visualisation which used Lego to highlight the different ways of presenting data. 
* Increasing information accessibility through video or animations: I used Lego to create this [6 second Vine video](https://vine.co/v/MtF0gYXDvlW) to illustrate the concept of FragDenStaat.de, Germany's Freedom of Information portal. 
* Interrogating more closely the voices and perspectives that I am exposed to: this year I'm only reading books by women (inspired by the #readwomen2014 campaign), and I'm aiming to read 50 books. I'm keeping a track of them via [Goodreads](https://www.goodreads.com/user/show/5852496-zara-rahman), and I've written about how I've been finding it here. 
* The way in which language about domestic violence affects the way in which we think about it: the most common way of expressing this movement is 'Violence Against Women', or VAW. This, in my opinion, erases the perpetrator of the violence, allowing us to forget that in all of these cases, there is someone who carries out the act of violence. Violence is not a passive thing: there is always someone carrying out the action, and as such, I believe it should be talked in the active, not the passive. Rather than Violence Against Women, how about Violence By X? 
* Language as a barrier to accessibility: I love having sponge 'jargon balls' to throw at people during workshops I hold, and I think language use is one of the most prevalent ways of excluding, or including, people from a certain discussion. I also find some jargon really funny – to document this within the world of coding, I started this glossary of ['Funny Coding Words'](https://github.com/zararah/learnings/blob/master/funny-coding-words.md). Feel free to contribute. 
* Myopia within feminism: I've written on this before, and in response to the points I made there, I've been curating this [twitter timeline of Feminism in the Majority World](https://twitter.com/zararah/timelines/420423544334336000), since the beginning of 2014. There's some pretty inspiring stuff there! 
* The links between civic technology, and global development's ICT4D movement. The 'civic technology' movement is growing in the rich world – Code for America being the most obvious example – and there are lots of overlaps between their aims and means, and the use of technology in development to empower citizens to hold their governments accountable.
